JUDY WOODRUFF: Good evening.
I'm Judy Woodruff.
On the "NewsHour" tonight: a
critical threat
in Britain, new arrests tied to
the Manchester
attack, as police search for a
network allegedly
behind the bomber.
Also ahead this Wednesday:
one-on-one with
senator Dianne Feinstein.
A key member of the Intelligence
Committee
weighs in on the state of the
Russia investigations
and the revelation that former
FBI Director
James Comey kept records of his
meetings with
President Trump.
SEN.
DIANNE FEINSTEIN (D),
California: One way
or another, they're going to be
turned over.
I think it's just a question of
time.
His documents are fundamental to
the issue
of his firing.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Then, we are in
Rome for President
Trump's first meeting with the
pope.
Plus: celebrating the
intersection between
music and technology.
Jeffrey Brown takes us to a
festival pushing
the boundaries of sound.
SUZANNE CIANI, Composer: There's
something
to be said about all music being
some translation
of our languaging, our way of
communicating.
It's a language.
This is a new language.
JUDY WOODRUFF: All that and more
on tonight's
"PBS NewsHour."
(BREAK)
JUDY WOODRUFF: The investigation
into Monday
night's bombing in Manchester,
England, is
spreading; 22-year-old
British-born Salman
Abedi blew himself up at a
concert Monday
night, killing 22 people.
Today, police in Libya arrested
his father
and younger brother.
British officials say Abedi
recently returned
from Libya.
Meanwhile, several more arrests
in Manchester.
Ciaran Jenkins of Independent
Television News
has that story.
CIARAN JENKINS: This is now a
hunt for Salman
Abedi's accomplices, armed
police and special
forces forcing their way into a
Central Manchester
property earlier.
It took a controlled explosion
to get them
in.
In the south of Manchester,
three more arrests,
and another in Wigan tonight,
followed the
arrest yesterday of Abedi's
older brother.
Now, there is a real urgency to
police activity
in this city today.
Remember, the current threat
level means an
attack is expected imminently.
Police want to know if there are
more bombs
in circulation, or if there are
other potential
attackers and, crucially, who
made this man's
deadly device.
Police have yet to say
definitively if it
was the work of an accomplice,
but, this afternoon,
the first confirmation that
Abedi didn't act
alone.
Do you believe somebody else put
the bomb
together, and are you searching
for that person?
Is this a search now for a
bomb-maker?
IAN HOPKINS, Greater Manchester
Chief Constable:
I think it's very clear that
this is a network
that we are investigating.
And, as I said, it continues at
apace.
There's extensive investigations
going on
and activity taking place across
Greater Manchester
as we speak.
CIARAN JENKINS: The threat level
is at its
highest for the first time in 10
years, the
army enlisted to protect key
landmarks at
Buckingham Palace and in
Westminster.
Manchester armed police patrol
Piccadilly
Station and the Arndale shopping
center.
WOMAN: It's not going to stop me
going about
my daily life or anything like
that.
It's just something in the back
of the mind
that's a bit scary.
WOMAN: It really all just feels
like a different
place, you know?
CIARAN JENKINS: As the hours
pass, we learn
a little more of the innocent
children who
were killed, and the adults who
accompanied
them.
Michelle Kiss, a mother of
three, taken, her
family said, in the most
traumatic way.
And Kelly Brewster, her friends
said she died
saving a young life, throwing
her body on
her niece as the bomb exploded.
Saffie Rousso from Leyland was
the youngest
victim, 8 years old.
CHRIS UPTON, Headmaster: Saffie
was simply
a beautiful little girl in every
aspect of
the word.
She was loved by everyone, and
her warmth
and kindness will be remembered
fondly.
Saffie was quiet and unassuming,
with a creative
flair.
CIARAN JENKINS: There is
resilience in a Manchester,
all too conscious of the
still-imminent threat,
but there is impatience too to
see those who
brought horror to this city
taken off the
streets.
JUDY WOODRUFF: This evening,
police in Manchester
announced two more arrests.
And Britain's home secretary
criticized U.S.
officials for leaking the name
of the bomber
and other information.
In the day's other news: The
Congressional
Budget Office issued its
analysis of the Republican
bill to replace Obamacare, a
bill that passed
the House of Representatives.
It estimates the measure would
leave 23 million
more Americans without health
insurance by
2026.
Now, that is one million fewer
than an earlier
version.
The report also projects deficit
reduction
of $119 billion over 10 years.
That is slightly less than
before.
We will take a closer look later
in the program.
Word has leaked that President
Trump disclosed
that the U.S. had positioned two
nuclear submarines
off North Korea.
The New York Times is reporting
that Mr. Trump
revealed the information in an
April 29 phone
call with Philippines President
Rodrigo Duterte.
According to confidential
transcripts, he
also praised Duterte for doing
-- quote -- "an
unbelievable job" fighting
drugs.
Thousands of drug suspects have
been killed
since Duterte took office.
Fighting raged for a second day
in the Southern
Philippines, where Islamist
militants have
seized control of a city.
At least 21 people have been
killed.
The fighting broke out yesterday
in Marawi
City, on the island of Mindanao.
President Duterte responded by
imposing martial
law.
Thousands of residents fled the
area today
amid tight security, as Duterte
vowed to hunt
down the militants.
RODRIGO DUTERTE, Philippine
President: If
I think you should die, you will
die.
If you fight us, you will die.
If there is an open defiance,
you will die.
And if it means many people
dying, so be it.
JUDY WOODRUFF: The Philippines
president also
said that he might extend
martial law nationwide
if the Islamic State group gains
a foothold.
Taiwan will become the first
Asian nation
to legalize same-sex marriage.
The country's constitutional
court ruled today
that a ban on such unions
violates the Taiwanese
constitution.
Now lawmakers have two years to
enact new
laws or amend the current
statutes.
If they do not, couples will be
allowed to
submit a written document to
have their marriages
recognized.
In economic news, Moody's rating
service lowered
China's credit rating by one
notch because
of its surging debt load.
Beijing protested the decision.
And on Wall Street, the Dow
Jones industrial
average gained 74 points to
close back above
21000.
The Nasdaq rose 24 points, and
the S&P 500
added six, marking a new record.
Still to come on the "NewsHour":
I speak to
California Senator Dianne
Feinstein about
the latest in the Russia
investigation; the
president meets the pope, after
trading barbs
with him last year; Montana
prepares for a
special congressional election;
and much more.
with him last year; Montana
prepares for a
special congressional election;
and much more.
There are now multiple
investigations into
Russian interference in the 2016
presidential
election and any possible ties
to the Trump
campaign.
On Capitol Hill, the probes have
expanded
to look into possible
obstruction and cover-up.
There are many questions
swirling around.
And we put some of them to
Senator Dianne
Feinstein, Democrat of
California.
She's a member of the Senate
Select Committee
on Intelligence.
She's also ranking member of the
Senate Judiciary
Committee.
I spoke with her a short time
ago.
Senator Feinstein, thank you
very much for
talking with us.
First, about those memos that
were written
by former FBI Director James
Comey, I know
your committee has been asking
for those.
Have you received them yet from
the FBI?
SEN.
DIANNE FEINSTEIN (D),
California: No, not
to my knowledge.
We have not.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Do you expect to
get them?
SEN.
DIANNE FEINSTEIN: Well, that's
an interesting
expectation.
And there are two answers.
One is yes, and one is no.
I think we're serious.
I believe we're serious.
And then we have to take the
next step.
We have invited very politely
the former director
to come and meet with us and be
able to ask
him questions in public.
However, he has agreed to go
before Intelligence,
which I appreciate.
I'm on the committee.
But I think he also ought to
provide the documents
to our committee and be willing
to come and
explain those documents.
We are the oversight committee,
after all.
He has said he wants to make a
public appearance.
He will do that at Intelligence,
and I think
he also should provide those
documents and
make an appearance at Judiciary
and explain
them.
JUDY WOODRUFF: How much of an
obstacle is
it, Senator, if those documents
are not turned
over?
SEN.
DIANNE FEINSTEIN: Well, I mean,
one way or
another, they're going to be
turned over.
I think it's just a question of
time.
And I think that his documents
are fundamental
to the issue of his firing.
How many times did he meet with
the president?
What were the circumstances?
What was said?
And was there any unusual
request, such as
leading to an investigation,
potential investigation
of the president of the United
States?
And I think that that's
something that one
way or another is going to come
out, and those
documents will come out.
And it's quite proper that they
do so.
That's what -- he kept notes to
be able to
protect himself in the event of
something
that's untoward.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Senator, how much
of this investigation
do you expect may ultimately be
about any
efforts by the president or by
the White House,
the administration, to stop or
slow down this
investigation?
SEN.
DIANNE FEINSTEIN: Hard to tell.
I don't think I can answer that
at this stage.
I think the president -- it's
interesting
the president is apparently in
the process
of retaining outside counsel.
That would likely have to do
with events that
an investigation might reveal.
I am one that believes that both
the House
Intelligence Committee and the
Senate Intelligence
Committee ought to add
investigators and people
with prosecutorial expertise to
the staff
for this investigation.
I think it has to be well -known
now that
even the 9/11 Commission had
about 100 staffers
and people with prosecutorial
experience and
investigative experience.
We, in the Intelligence
Committee, have our
intelligence staff, and they're
accustomed
to reading intelligence,
interpreting intelligence,
and they're very good at what
they do.
But one of the things that's
been brought
to my attention is that you need
technical
people.
If you're going to follow the
money...
JUDY WOODRUFF: Right.
SEN.
DIANNE FEINSTEIN: ... as
Representative Speier
said, and get involved with
financing, you
need financial people that will
show you how
to and, in fact, get the
appropriate information
in the appropriate way.
If it's an investigation you're
looking at,
you need people, I think, who
are trained
investigators.
And...
JUDY WOODRUFF: Senator --
Senator, if I may,
it sounds as if you're saying
this investigation,
the potential size of it has
grown much larger
than even what it seemed to be a
week ago.
SEN.
DIANNE FEINSTEIN: Well, I think
that's right.
I think that is happening.
I think, as events go and
comments are made
by principal parties, it adds to
the investigative
material that's out there.
And I think that what both the
House and the
Senate needs to do is create the
atmosphere
where Bob Mueller could come in
as an absolutely
responsible and respected former
prosecutor,
former U.S. attorney, former
director of the
FBI, and be the special counsel,
and see that
the FBI counterterrorism
investigation and
criminal investigation -- it's
both -- are
able to proceed as rapid -- is
able to proceed
as rapidly as possible.
JUDY WOODRUFF: The Washington
Post reported
last Friday, Senator, I'm sure
you know, that
the investigation -- that there
is a -- quote
-- "person of interest" in this
investigation
who is a senior official in the
Trump White
House who's very close to the
president.
Do you know who that is?
SEN.
DIANNE FEINSTEIN: No, I do not.
I read the same article, but I
do not know
who that person is.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Are you getting
the cooperation
from everyone you're seeking?
We know that General Flynn,
Michael Flynn,
has declined to turn over
documents, but,
other than General Flynn, are
there others
who are not cooperating?
SEN.
DIANNE FEINSTEIN: I think, with
respect to
the Judiciary Committee, Senator
Grassley
and I spoke on the floor.
And we have written letters
asking for materials
and asking that Mr. Comey,
inviting him to
appear.
I think we perhaps need to do
more than just
invite.
I think it's important that he
come before
the oversight committee that has
responsibility
for oversight of the FBI and at
least do us
the courtesy of appearing, and
that we should
be able to look at his material
and ask questions
about them.
So, I think both Senator
Grassley -- are on
the same pathway to that.
And, hopefully, we will be able
to accomplish
it.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And, Senator, I
want to turn
you to one other issue that's
much before
Congress right now, and that is
the health
care reform bill that passed the
House of
Representatives.
SEN.
DIANNE FEINSTEIN: Oh, yes.
JUDY WOODRUFF: It's now in the
Senate.
The Congressional Budget Office
came up -- came
out just this afternoon with its
own estimate
of the cost and the
implications.
And among other things, it says
that almost
as many people will be without
insurance under
this proposed legislation as
there was in
the original Republican
proposal.
Is it your sense that this bill
has a chance
in the U.S. Senate right now?
SEN.
DIANNE FEINSTEIN: Well, no one
knows what's
in it.
My understanding, there was a
committee of
about 12 men appointed from the
Senate to
put together a bill.
I think the same mistake is
being made in
the Senate that was made in the
House, no
public hearings.
The medical profession has no
chance to respond.
The insurance industry can't
respond.
Those people that run hospitals
can't respond,
and the general public can't
respond.
And it's unbelievable.
This is the first time in my
over 20 years
in the Senate a big bill, a
costly bill, a
bill important to every single
American citizen
has no hearing and goes right on
to the floor
as some kind of secretive
document.
I have no idea what's in the
Senate bill.
And it's not the way business
should be done.
It creates an atmosphere that
makes a bill
more difficult to pass, not less
difficult.
And it certainly gets the
emotions going.
You have 24 million people who
are going to
be without insurance.
It makes no sense to me.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Well, we will
certainly all
be watching to see what happens
to it in the
Senate.
Senator Dianne Feinstein, we
thank you.
SEN.
DIANNE FEINSTEIN: Thank you,
Judy.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Now we return to
the Manchester
attack and the ongoing
investigations happening
JUDY WOODRUFF: Now we return to
the Manchester
attack and the ongoing
investigations happening
in Britain.
William Brangham takes a deeper
look.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: As British
officials continue
to piece together who was behind
this attack,
and to try to stop another from
occurring,
we wanted to take a closer look
at just how
the U.K. handles
counterterrorism.
For that, I'm joined by R.P.
Eddy.
He served on the staff of the
National Security
Council during the Clinton
administration,
where he worked closely with
British officials.
And he is the author, along with
Richard Clarke,
of "Warnings: Finding Cassandras
to Stop Catastrophes."
R.P. Eddy, thanks very much for
being here.
I wonder if you could just start
off telling
us the distinctions that U.K.
intelligence
and terror officials have as
compared to,
say, U.S. officials?
R.P. EDDY, Former National
Security Council
Staff Member: Well, overall,
it's a fairly
similar system.
There is probably two key
differences.
One is, it's easier to open up
investigations
and surveillance on individuals
in the U.K.,
British citizens or others, than
it is in
the United States.
The second thing is that we have
an inverted
model.
In the United States -- for
example, here,
I'm sitting in New York City.
The NYPD would go out and
collect much of
the intelligence about a
terrorist attack,
potential terrorist attack, and
then the FBI
would make the arrest, depending
on the maturity
of the intelligence collection
in the city.
In London, in the U.K., it's
opposite.
The Metropolitan Police Service
or the local
police would actually do the
arresting, where
MI5 and MPS would do the
intelligence gathering.
But the key difference is, it's
easier to
begin surveillance on people of
concern.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: And the U.K.,
I know, also
has a wide network of CCTV
cameras, where
I know that that's been a
relevant tool in
prior terror investigations.
R.P. EDDY: It's a massive
difference.
So, they adapted the use of
closed-circuit
televisions much earlier than we
did in the
United States in our major
cities.
And in every terrorist
investigation since
the '80s, CCTVs have been hugely
useful in
very quickly figuring out who
was behind it
and wrapping up the cell.
That and the laws, most of these
things are
children of growing up in the
era of the IRA
threat.
So they addressed their
terrorism threat and
got over some of their learnings
earlier than
we did.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: Even so, with
all those
tools, it's clear that the U.K.
officials
missed this particular plot.
And it seems to me that this is
just an indication
of how difficult it is to
identify individuals
or maybe a group of individuals
who are trying
to plot quietly these types of
attacks.
R.P. EDDY: Well, let's say
there's probably
two big reasons for that.
The first one is technological.
And you have heard a number of
U.S. government
officials and British government
officials
over the last three or four
years bemoan the
fact that it's much easier now
to encrypt
your communications on your cell
phone or
over the Internet to a
military-grade level
than it used to be.
So, in some instances, we're
blind as we try
to do collection on those
signals intelligence.
So that's the first reason that
it's a little
harder, or much harder.
The second reason is, ISIS is
different than
al-Qaida.
Now, part of why they're
different is, they're
interested in -- or they're more
willing to
allow or to foster what you
would call retail
attacks, small attacks by lone
wolves or people
who are just sort of getting
converted into
extremism by ISIS, whereas
al-Qaida, as we
know, is more interested in
large-scale attacks,
taking down huge buildings,
blowing up embassies,
doing things simultaneously.
So the latter model, the
al-Qaida, is easier
to find, requires more planning,
and, of course,
requires larger cells, requires
more training.
The ISIS model, of being an idea
of mass destruction,
is much harder to catch.
Someone can be just converted
into extremism
over the Internet.
They don't even have to meet
anybody, and
they can go off and carry out
smaller, harder-to-surveil,
harder-to-stop terrorist
attacks.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: The theater
that was the
site of this attack is what's
known as a soft
target, a place where the
security apparatus
is just not that robust.
How do we as a society writ
large go about
trying to harden places like
that?
Either we do that to try to
prevent these
types of things or we just, in
some level,
try to become accustomed to the
fact that
this might be a more common
occurrence.
R.P. EDDY: Well, we should never
become accustomed
to it.
And I would say, editorially, I
don't think
we should allow these
conversations that say,
oh, it was only 22 people, look
how many died
from dirty water the same day.
Those are both horrible things,
but they're
different.
Terrorism, these terrorist acts,
terrorize,
and they change things
politically and they
change our way of life.
So, can we accept that our soft
targets are
going to be hit?
No.
Is it very, very hard to protect
these soft
targets?
Absolutely.
Think about the last time you
went to the
airport.
When you got through TSA, the
magnetometers,
you had a degree of safety.
But as you waited in line,
queued up, 50 or
1,000 of you, you are a very
soft target.
The same thing happens at
theaters.
football games.
So it's a very unfortunate
reality that we
really can't secure everything.
And ISIS is sort of
well-situated by allowing
or fostering these smaller
attacks to hit
us at that weak point.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: All right,
R.P. Eddy, thank
you very much for your time.
R.P. EDDY: Thanks for having me.
JUDY WOODRUFF: President Trump's
first trip
abroad placed him at the Vatican
today, marking
Mr. Trump's first meeting with
the leader
of the Catholic Church.
Special correspondent Malcolm
Brabant is in
Rome for us tonight, and he has
this report.
MALCOLM BRABANT: It was a
meeting of two men
with a difficult history.
After a public greeting,
President Trump and
Pope Francis spoke privately for
half-an-hour.
Later, there were introductions
all around,
and group pictures, with Mr.
Trump smiling
broadly, and the pontiff
stone-faced.
Just a little over a year ago,
they clashed
publicly.
The pope took on the Trump
campaign pledge
to build a wall along the
U.S.-Mexico border.
POPE FRANCIS, Leader of Catholic
Church (through
translator): A person who thinks
only about
building walls, wherever they
may be, and
not building bridges, is not a
Christian.
MALCOLM BRABANT: The candidate
answered with
a dig of his own.
DONALD TRUMP, President of the
United States:
For a religious leader to
question a person's
faith is disgraceful.
MALCOLM BRABANT: Today, instead
of barbs,
they exchanged gifts.
Mr. Trump presented the pope
with a first-edition
set of Martin Luther King Jr.'s
works.
Francis offered his three main
teaching documents
and an olive branch medal.
DONALD TRUMP: We can use peace.
MALCOLM BRABANT: Later, after
touring the
Sistine Chapel and St. Peter's
Basilica, and
the president offered a new
assessment of
the pope.
DONALD TRUMP: He is something.
He is really good.
We had a fantastic meeting.
We had a fantastic tour.
It was really beautiful.
MALCOLM BRABANT: President
Trump's take on
his meeting with Pope Francis
differs greatly
from the interpretation of
veteran Vatican
analysts.
They believe that the president
was exaggerating.
The Vatican issued an unusually
brief statement
about the discussions.
RICCARDO CRISTIANO, Journalist:
They qualified
the meeting as cordial, which
means that the
meeting wasn't a cold one, but a
cordial one,
but, in any case, it was not a
warm meeting.
MALCOLM BRABANT: Longtime
Vatican watcher
Riccardo Cristiano says he
doubts there was
any meeting of minds.
RICCARDO CRISTIANO: I think that
it was a
opportunity to meet, but also
The impression
is that they understood they
have different
perspectives.
MALCOLM BRABANT: Analyst Robert
Mickens was
far more upbeat.
He says it was a success for the
Vatican.
ROBERT MICKENS, Analyst: Pope
Francis is always
very gracious.
He likes to build bridges of
encounter.
It's very, very important to get
the superpower
online with the soft power, the
Holy See.
MALCOLM BRABANT: The president
also met with
the Vatican's secretary of
state, who encouraged
continued U.S. participation in
the Paris
climate agreement.
Secretary of State Rex Tillerson
gave his
own appraisal on the flight from
Rome to Brussels.
REX TILLERSON, U.S. Secretary of
State: Well,
we had a good exchange on the
difficulty of
balancing, addressing climate
change, responses
to climate change, and ensuring
that you still
have a thriving economy.
MALCOLM BRABANT: The president
arrived in
Brussels this evening for
meetings with European
Union and NATO officials, and
was greeted
by the Belgian prime minister
and royal family.
Thousands of demonstrators also
turned out,
protesting the president's
immigration and
environmental policies.
For the "PBS NewsHour," I'm
Malcolm Brabant
in Rome.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Stay with us.
Coming up on the "NewsHour": how
the Trump
administration is changing the
makeup of the
EPA; the ripple effects of fake
news -- a
Democratic staffer's death
sparks conspiracy
theories; plus, a festival that
melds technology
and music.
But, first, let's go back to the
health care
battle and the new analysis that
came out
late today from the
Congressional Budget Office
of the GOP bill that passed the
House of Representatives
almost three weeks ago.
It now sits with the Senate.
The CBO found that the House
bill would lead
to 23 million more people being
uninsured
by the year 2026 and it would
reduce the deficit
by about $119 billion over a
decade.
Our Lisa Desjardins has been
studying the
numbers and watching the
politics of all of
this, and she joins me now.
So, Lisa, you have had a little
bit of time
to look at this.
Essentially, what is different
about the CBO's
look at this version of
Republican health
care from what the earlier
version was?
LISA DESJARDINS: Well, in those
top-line numbers,
not much.
The changes that the Republicans
made meant
that there was an improvement in
the number
of people with insurance by one
million people.
That's something Republicans
were happy to
see, but it's not really very
much.
Judy, I think, overall, the
differences are
in the individual effects here.
We see from CBO a forecast that
says under
this Republican bill you would
see a wide
disparity, with the less healthy
seeing much
higher bills and also older
people seeing
much higher bills.
JUDY WOODRUFF: So, we know the
Republicans
were trying to do a number of
things with
this legislation to make it more
palatable
to more people to win not only
approval in
the House, but to win approval
in the Senate.
They were trying to get premiums
down.
Talk about some of the changes
they made and
what the CBO is saying about
that?
LISA DESJARDINS: The biggest
change a lot
of people would be familiar with
is, they
want to give states the ability
to waive out
of requirements called essential
benefits.
These are things that say any
health insurance
must cover the basics.
They want states to be able to
waive out of
that.
They also want states to be able
to waive
out of requirement on
preexisting conditions,
allow insurers to charge more
for the sick
than they can now.
CBO looked at those potential
waiver changes
and what that mean for premiums.
Let's look at an example of what
we're talking
about.
First of all, a 21-year-old
who's making,
say, $26,500, so, low-income --
that is who
this is targeted at -- now that
21-year-old's
premium would be $1,700.
But under this bill in a state
that waives
out of those requirements, that
21-year-old
would pay $1,250.
That's good for that healthy
21-year-old.
Let's look now instead at a
64-year-old American
paying $1,700 now.
But, Judy, look at that.
Under this GOP bill, with the
waivers out
of requirements, the CBO thinks
that 64-year-old
would see their premiums
skyrocket.
Essentially, what the CBO has
found -- and
it's going to vary market to
market -- is
that the less healthy and older
Americans
would see more costs.
JUDY WOODRUFF: So, premiums are
part of the
story, but we know something
else that the
CBO was looking at was, frankly,
the overall
quality of health care under
this new legislation.
LISA DESJARDINS: And this is
such an important
point.
We have talked about premiums.
It's sort of a buzzword in a
way, almost.
But CBO went deeper and said
that, in some
of these states with the
waivers, premiums
may go down for some people,
but, overall,
they think that health care
costs could substantially
increase, because what you're
getting are
health insurance packages that
cover a lot
less.
So, if you're sick, you might
have a low premium,
but you're going to pay a lot
more out of
pocket.
Also, Judy, I asked on a call I
just got off
of with the CBO about
stabilization.
Are these markets going to be
stable?
They told me point blank they
think there
will be a stability problem in
these waiver
markets.
They say some people may not be
able to get
premiums at all and it would
take those markets
back to the days before the
Affordable Care
Act.
Essentially, Judy, more of a
gamble for Americans.
You would able to pay less, but
you would
have much higher risk.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Sounds like this
is going to
be even more complicated than
what the Republicans
-- it's going to make what they
sent over
more complicated and make it
challenging to
get it passed.
LISA DESJARDINS: I don't see any
Republicans
coming out with happy tweets or
statements
today.
No, Democrats are talking about
the CBO score,
not Republicans.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Lisa Desjardins,
following
the story, thank you very much.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Lisa Desjardins,
following
the story, thank you very much.
And sticking with politics,
Montana's at-large
seat in the U.S. House of
Representatives
is up for grabs, and Democrats
are eager to
frame the fight as a referendum
on President
Trump.
To discuss why tomorrow's
special election
is garnering national attention,
we are joined
by Anna Rau of Montana PBS.
Anna, thank you for joining us.
Montana is a very red state.
Why is this even close?
ANNA RAU, Montana PBS: Well,
that's the question,
actually, going forward.
And I think people are watching
it from the
outside very closely, because it
has tightened
in the last month.
You have seen it go from maybe
15 -- 12 to
15 points, and then internal
polling within
the campaigns are showing closer
maybe eight
to 10 points, maybe six to eight
points, so
in some of the best polls for
the Democrats.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Well, let's talk
about the
candidates in this race.
Tell us just quickly the
differences between
the two of them.
ANNA RAU: OK.
Well, they're both outsiders,
political outsiders.
But Rob Quist is a country
bluegrass player.
He played with the Mission
Mountain Wood Band
back in the '70s.
He's very popular throughout the
state for
his music, but has absolutely no
political
experience.
And Greg Gianforte is a
millionaire from Bozeman
who made his money creating a
great business
in Montana that employed over
500 people.
So he created all these
high-wage jobs in
the software business in
Bozeman.
So he has this kind of business
acumen behind
him, but, again, very little
political experience.
He did run for governor in
November, but lost
narrowly to Governor Bullock,
who was the
incumbent.
And I think there was a
situation there where
the whole ticket went red,
except for the
governor's race.
So some of those Republicans
actually crossed
when they got to Gianforte and
Bullock, and
voted for Bullock.
So, that's been kind of a thing
here too that
Quist think he's got a shot, and
Democrats
think they have a shot because
of what happened
in the governor's race.
So, it's kind of those two
candidates, very
colorful candidate.s
JUDY WOODRUFF: What do polls and
your interviews
with voters tell you, though, is
most on voters'
minds?
ANNA RAU: Well, early on in the
campaign,
it sounds like the two
candidates were saying
public lands and regulations out
of Washington
were the big issues, because out
West we have
the extractive industries,
timber and mining.
And so when it came to
Republican voters,
they were very concerned about
EPA regulation
and government overreach.
When it came to Democrat voters
and some Republican
voters, public lands and public
access was
a big issue.
In Montana, we have over 25
million acres
of public land.
Also, health care.
At the very end here, health
care has really
picked up, especially with
what's going on
in Washington, D.C.
And Gianforte and Quist have
come out very
strongly on the health care
bill.
And there's been some
controversy about their
positions on it.
But Quist has made that a
cornerstone of his
campaign because he had a health
care issue
in the '90s that he says
explains some of
his problems financially and is
in favor of
maybe a single-payer program.
And Gianforte, for his part, has
said he wouldn't
support the current repeal and
replace.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And just very
quick final question.
How much has Donald Trump,
President Trump,
come up in this campaign?
ANNA RAU: Well, JUDY WOODRUFF:
How much has
President Trump come up in this
campaign?
Well, Gianforte has said from
the very beginning,
make no mistake about this, this
is a referendum
on Donald Trump.
I think that he was very popular
in Montana.
So, Quist tries to make it --
his campaign
tries to make it less about
Trump and more
about the characters of the
candidates and
their politics.
So they try to argue, it's not a
referendum.
But you see thousands and
thousands of dollars
coming from small donors out of
state to Quist
in some support for him, maybe
the last stand
or the stand they're trying to
make in Montana
to say, we aren't happy with the
Trump -- with
what the Trump administration is
doing.
So, I think, to a certain
extent, you have
to argue that Trump, the Trump
administration
and what has been coming out has
had an impact
on the race and certainly on
fund-raising
for Quist.
So, it will be interesting to
see how much
impact it has tomorrow night.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Anna Rau of
Montana PBS, thank
you very much.
ANNA RAU: Yes, thank you.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Now: big changes
at the EPA
in the Trump administration.
As a candidate, the president
vowed to get
rid of it in -- quote -- "almost
any form."
The budget he unveiled yesterday
would reduce
its budget by a third, more than
any other
federal agency.
What is less known is a series
of recent moves
that would give industry more of
a voice when
it comes to shaping its approach
to scientific
recommendations.
That's the focus of our Leading
Edge segment
tonight.
Jeffrey Brown looks at what's
afoot.
JEFFREY BROWN: It all has to do
the way the
EPA and the government evaluate
science underlying
many regulations.
Earlier this month, the EPA and
the Interior
Department announced they would
review and
overhaul who serves on key
scientific advisory
boards.
The EPA move attracted
particular notice,
since its administrator, Scott
Pruitt, decided
not to renew the contracts for
half the members
of the so-called Board of
Scientific Counselors.
Our scientific correspondent,
Miles O'Brien,
is here now to help fill in the
picture.
So, Miles, the Board of
Scientific Counselors,
what is that?
What do they do?
MILES O'BRIEN: Jeff, a formerly
obscure board
at the EPA made up of 18
scientists, most
of them academics, a few of them
from industry,
their goal is to get really deep
in the weeds
with EPA staff researchers and
give them some
sound advice on research
priorities and equipment
and techniques that allow them
to do their
work.
They do not get involved in
policy, however.
JEFFREY BROWN: What exactly
happened last
week?
MILES O'BRIEN: Well, nine of
them whose term
had come up, their first term
came up, were
told they were not being
automatically renewed,
which has been the practice in
the past.
It is an unusual move.
They were told they could
reapply for their
jobs, but it is something that
has taken that
board aback, for sure.
I spoke with the chairperson of
the Board
of Scientific Counselors,
Deborah Swackhamer.
She's a professor emerita at the
University
of Minnesota.
She was quite shocked.
DEBORAH SWACKHAMER, Chair, Board
of Scientific
Counselors: It is highly unusual
for someone
to not be reappointed.
This is not a political board in
any way,
shape or form, and we don't
advocate for any
kind of regulation or lack of
regulation.
We're not political.
So to say that we are somehow --
we would
behave differently because we
were appointed
under President Obama is --
actually, it's
a little insulting.
We are scientists.
We are not going to be swayed by
who's president
or who is administrator.
I have served under three
presidents and four
administrators of EPA in my time
on various
boards, and it never has
influenced how I
think about the science that I'm
reviewing.
MILES O'BRIEN: So, the board
stands by its
autonomy and its objectivity,
and yet this
happens, Jeff.
JEFFREY BROWN: Well, so what was
the reason
-- the reasoning given by the
Trump administration?
MILES O'BRIEN: Well, a
spokesperson for the
EPA says this: "We should have
people who
understand the impact of
regulations on the
regulating community."
The administrator of the EPA,
Scott Pruitt,
last month was in Pennsylvania
talking to
some coal miners, and he was
talking about
the broader issue of industry
input on EPA
regulations.
Listen to this.
SCOTT PRUITT, Environmental
Protection Agency
Administrator: As we spend time
with the industry
across this country recognizing
that we have
such opportunity with respect to
energy independence,
that just by spending time, some
on those
on the environmental left think
that we're
somehow compromising outcomes
with respect
to our environment.
JEFFREY BROWN: Well, so, Miles,
a new administration,
as you say, often get to appoint
a lot of
their own new people.
What kind of responses were you
hearing about
this action?
MILES O'BRIEN: Well, it's a
definite shift.
And there is something at work
here that's
been going on for quite some
time.
I spoke to a former assistant
administrator
for the EPA during the George W.
Bush administration,
Jeffrey Holmstead.
He's now an attorney in private
practice.
And it is his contention -- and
this is widely
held in conservative circles --
that simply
stating a conflict of interests
is enough
to eliminate it.
This is what he has to say.
JEFFREY HOLMSTEAD, Former EPA
Assistant Administrator:
See, I don't understand why
there's a conflict.
As long as they are disclosed,
the fact that
someone has done some consulting
work for
industry shouldn't disqualify
them from offering
their scientific views on
things.
And those -- anyone who's
engaged in that
debate can take those views into
account.
JEFFREY BROWN: And, of course,
on the other
hand, many in the science
committee fear a
broader move towards greater
influence for
the industry, those who are
being regulated.
MILES O'BRIEN: Yes.
The concern here, Jeff, is that
if you stack
these boards with people who are
industry
researchers, who are weighing in
on subject
matters that affect the
corporations that
pay their salaries, that that is
going to
put the thumb on the scale or in
some way
block regulation that would be
scientifically
justified.
It's a reasonable concern, and
we're kind
of in the middle of this debate
between traditional
academics and industry
researchers to try
to sort this out.
JEFFREY BROWN: So, what is to
come?
What is next?
MILES O'BRIEN: Well, this is
what's interesting.
There are 21 separate boards of
all manner
that are advising the
Environmental Protection
Agency.
The granddaddy of them all is
the Scientific
Advisory Board.
Changing its constituency
requires a vote
of Congress.
And so far, the House has done
just that.
In March, it passed legislation
which would
allow the EPA to change the
rules to allow
more industry input on that
Scientific Advisory
Board.
Couple that with the so-called
secret science
legislation which makes it very
difficult
for researchers on these boards
to use certain
types of data related to human
studies in
weighing their decisions, and
scientists are
very concerned that there are
other shoes
that are going to drop here.
Let's listen to Deborah
Swackhamer one more
time.
DEBORAH SWACKHAMER: It almost
feels like this
is the first of a wave of
potential actions
that are going to further
marginalize science
advice, and, therefore,
marginalize the science
being done at EPA, marginalize
the science
being done in other government
agencies, and
then ultimately just there is
going to be
this very slow-motion, snowball
effect.
MILES O'BRIEN: And just to add
to the optics
here, the EPA has taken down its
Web site
on climate change.
The spokesperson is telling us
they're changing
it to reflect the priorities of
the new administration
and the new administrator, Mr.
Pruitt.
Now, Mr. Pruitt, you will
recall, when he
was the attorney general of
Oklahoma, he sued
the EPA more than a dozen times
and more recently,
as the newly appointed EPA
administrator,
said, carbon dioxide is not even
a greenhouse
gas.
JEFFREY BROWN: All right, Miles
O'Brien, thanks,
as always.
MILES O'BRIEN: You're welcome,
Jeff.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Now: how an
unsolved murder
in the nation's capital turned
into a conspiracy
theory, and then became a case
study of how
false news spreads.
It underscores, once again, the
problem of
polarized politics and divided
sources of
information.
John Yang reports.
SEAN HANNITY, Host, "Hannity":
To the extent
of my ability, I am not going to
stop trying
to find the truth.
JOHN YANG: The story of Seth
Rich's death
is a story of how fake news
spreads from Web
sites and online forums like
Reddit to prime-time
cable TV.
SEAN HANNITY: Another massive
breaking news
story, explosive developments in
the mysterious
murder of former DNC staffer
Seth Rich.
JOHN YANG: Early one morning
last July, 27-year-old
Rich was found fatally shot near
his Washington,
D.C., home.
Politics had drawn the Omaha
native to the
city, and he was working at the
Democratic
National Committee when he died.
The case is still unsolved.
D.C. police theorize it was a
botched robbery,
the latest in a string of
attacks in the neighborhood.
As Rich's family and friends
mourned, he became
the subject of a baseless
conspiracy theory.
The claim was that he was the
source of the
DNC e-mails about the Hillary
Clinton campaign
that WikiLeaks released later
that month.
MAN: A private investigator says
there is
evidence to show Rich was
communicating with
WikiLeaks.
JOHN YANG: Last week, FOX's
Washington station
broadcast an interview with FOX
News legal
commentator Rod Wheeler.
QUESTION: Do you have sources in
the FBI saying
that there is information
that...
ROD WHEELER, FOX News: For sure.
QUESTION: .. that could link
Seth Rich to
WikiLeaks?
ROD WHEELER: Absolutely.
Yes.
And that's confirmed.
JOHN YANG: Two days later,
Wheeler backtracked,
saying his statements were a
miscommunication,
but not before Trump ally Sean
Hannity devoted
a portion of his FOX show to the
story, giving
Wheeler a much bigger platform
for his unsubstantiated
claims.
ROD WHEELER: With the totality
of everything
else that I found in this case,
it's very
consistent for a person with my
experience
to begin to think, well, perhaps
there were
some e-mail communications
between Seth and
WikiLeaks.
JOHN YANG: For some conservative
commentators,
retractions and fact-checks have
appeared
to make little difference.
Supporters of President Trump
are trying to
use the story to discredit the
investigation
into Russian meddling in the
election and
possible collusion with the
Trump campaign.
Newt Gingrich on "FOX & Friends"
this past
Sunday:
NEWT GINGRICH (R), Former
Speaker of the House:
We have this very strange story
now of this
young man who worked for the
Democratic National
Committee who apparently was
assassinated
at 4:00 in the morning, having
given WikiLeaks
something like 23,000 -- I'm
sorry -- 53,000
e-mails and 17,000 attachments.
Nobody is investigating that.
JOHN YANG: There is no evidence
for those
claims.
Yesterday, the FOX News Web site
retracted
a story it had published on
Rich's death,
saying, "It wasn't initially
subjected to
the high degree of editorial
scrutiny we require,
and has since been removed."
On his radio show yesterday,
Hannity initially
doubled down.
SEAN HANNITY: I am not FOX.com
or FOXNews.com.
I retracted nothing.
Alexios Mantzarlis is at the
Poynter Institute,
a journalism school.
ALEXIOS MANTZARLIS, Poynter
Institute: Basic
journalistic principles weren't
met.
Right?
The story was run without the
source being
properly vetted and without the
D.C. police
or the Rich family being
consulted.
JOHN YANG: Today, Rich's parents
wrote in
The Washington Post: "The amount
of pain and
anguish this has caused us is
unbearable.
With every conspiratorial
flare-up, we are
forced to relive Seth's murder
and a small
piece of us dies as more of
Seth's memory
is torn away from us."
ALEXIOS MANTZARLIS: We have two
grieving parents
who would like to find out the
truth about
their murdered son, and what
they're getting
instead is avalanche of
conspiracy theories
and politically motivated spin.
JOHN YANG: On his FOX show last
night, Hannity
said he'd had heartfelt talks
with the Rich
family.
SEAN HANNITY: Out of respect for
the family's
wishes, for now, I am not
discussing this
matter at this time.
JOHN YANG: But then he spoke to
his fans.
SEAN HANNITY: Please do not
interpret what
I'm saying tonight to mean
anything.
Don't read into this.
I promise you I am not doing --
going to stop
doing my job.
JOHN YANG: Analysts say it
underscores the
fragmented media world we live
in.
ALEXIOS MANTZARLIS: The lesson
here is that
it is easy to find online and in
this enormous
wealth of information that there
is around
us all kinds of stuff, all kinds
of conspiracies,
all kinds of hoaxes.
If you are predisposed to think
that something
sketchy happened with the DNC
and the leaks,
then you are more likely to
believe stories
that aren't necessarily true,
and as this
one.
It has been roundly debunked.
JOHN YANG: But still a story
that shows no
signs of going away, at least in
some circles.
For the "PBS NewsHour," I'm John
Yang.
JUDY WOODRUFF: The idea, how
technology, music
and science can inspire one
another, and to
the creation of distinct new
sounds.
Jeffrey Brown is back to take us
to an unusual
gathering held just a few days
ago in Durham,
North Carolina.
JEFFREY BROWN: Start with a
circuit board,
add knobs and dials, solder
everything together,
and, eventually, if you know
what you're doing,
you have an instrument that can
do this.
Moogfest, named after inventor
Robert Moog,
is a celebration of the art,
engineering and
technology of synthesizers,
machines that
create sounds electronically.
By night, it's a festival of
different genres
of music, centered on, as they
call them here,
synths.
By day, talks, workshops, a
pop-up factory,
and plenty of hands-on
tinkering, twisting,
and tapping.
Creative director Emmy Parker
says the big
idea behind the festival is in
the name of
the instrument, to synthesize.
EMMY PARKER, Moogfest: We try to
create a
space where people have the
opportunity, even
though they're surrounded by
thousands of
people here, where they have the
opportunity
to get lost inside their own
minds.
And the tools that they're
engaging with,
in this case synthesizers, help
them, assist
them to kind of open new doors
to new creative
ideas.
JEFFREY BROWN: All these
gadgets, they may
look like fun toys to unlock
your inner geek.
It's really part of a revolution
in sound
that's all around us, whether we
know it or
not.
Just one example: a sound you
have heard a
million times.
Suzanne Ciani used a synth to
create the famous
pop and pour sound of Coke while
working in
the ad industry in the '70s.
SUZANNE CIANI, Composer: They're
electronic
bubbles.
And they're like the platonic
idea of a Coke
bottle opening.
There's some perfection there.
JEFFREY BROWN: I never heard
that.
(LAUGHTER)
SUZANNE CIANI: Right.
JEFFREY BROWN: The platonic idea
of Coke.
A classically trained pianist,
in the 1960s,
she started down the road that
would make
her a rock star in here at
Moogfest, as a
pioneering musician and composer
of electronic
music and sounds.
This year, she was given the
festival's innovation
award.
SUZANNE CIANI: My job was to
just work intuitively
with the knobs and the dials.
So, it was a very friendly --
it's not scary.
It's just getting to know the
machine as if
it were a friend.
JEFFREY BROWN: So you are having
a conversation
with the machine?
SUZANNE CIANI: Yes.
There's something to be said
about all music
being some translation of our
languaging,
our way of communicating.
It's a language.
This is a new language.
JEFFREY BROWN: Ciani worked with
Don Buchla,
one of electronic music's
greatest inventors.
Over the years, a wide variety
of musicians
have seen the potential for new
sounds and
effects through synthesizers.
Moogfest featured a range of
current performers,
indie rock band Animal
Collective, dance music
by 808 State, and the
experimental soundscapes
of Moor Mother.
Also appearing, the synth band
Survive, which
created the soundtrack for the
hit Netflix
drama "Stranger Things,"
futuristic sounds
matching the eerie tales of the
show.
Band members Michael Stein and
Kyle Dixon:
KYLE DIXON, Survive: One thing
about the show
that's great is that we don't
have to describe
what our music sounds like
anymore.
MICHAEL STEIN, Survive: As the
band, yes.
KYLE DIXON: Or we only have to
use a couple
of words and...
JEFFREY BROWN: Those words are?
KYLE DIXON: "Stranger Things."
(LAUGHTER)
JEFFREY BROWN: "Stranger
Things," and everybody
kind of gets the sense of...
KYLE DIXON: Yes, you're like,
OK, OK.
I get it.
JEFFREY BROWN: Yes.
In the meantime, scientists and
engineers
keep coming up with new things
for musicians
to try.
Dave Rossum designed some of the
modules,
or components, on this
synthesizer.
DAVE ROSSUM, Rossum
Electro-Music: These modules,
we call them universal control
voltage generators.
That's a very big batch of
words, but, basically,
it just means that they're
creating interesting
electronic signals, so that we
can make interesting
notes.
JEFFREY BROWN: At Moogfest, you
could build
your own synthesizer, at least a
simple model.
Comedian Hannibal Buress, who
performed at
the festival, decided he
couldn't miss this
class.
HANNIBAL BURESS, Comedian: Got
to try to do
that.
That's the most extreme thing
you could do.
JEFFREY BROWN: For some of us, I
think that's
right.
So, how's it going?
HANNIBAL BURESS: It was a little
tough getting
some of the components in
initially, but we
figured it out, and now we're
midway through.
We're in the soldering phase,
which is something
I have never done.
I'm not a crafty dude.
I don't work with my hands like
that.
I can't build a shelf.
Or I haven't done anything like
it before,
so I'm enjoying the experience.
JEFFREY BROWN: A view of the
future was also
on display here, including a
demonstration
of so-called machine learning to
create new
music.
Google's Adam Roberts and Jesse
Engel showed
us A.I.
Jam session, an artificial
intelligence program
that responds to the notes you
play with something
of its own creation, based on
input and analysis
of tens of thousands of existing
melodies.
Is it now composing this music?
ADAM ROBERTS, Google: yes.
JEFFREY BROWN: yes?
ADAM ROBERTS: Yes, and so...
JEFFREY BROWN: Based on all the
information
you have fed it?
ADAM ROBERTS: There still was a
human incredibly
involved in creating that
system, deciding
what data to train it on.
JEFFREY BROWN: Another
experiment, called
NSynth, is developed through a
huge database
of sounds of instruments and
more, including
animals, that form a so-called
neural net.
It allows merging two sounds to
create a new
one, even a trombone and a dog.
JESSE ENGEL, Google: We're just
creating the
ability to explore and express
ourselves in
new ways using technology.
We're not just creating tools.
We're creating ways to make new
tools as well.
JEFFREY BROWN: Technology at the
service of
music and art.
For the "PBS NewsHour," I'm
Jeffrey Brown
at Moogfest in Durham, North
Carolina.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Before we go
tonight, we want
take this moment to remember a
pioneer of
public broadcasting and a
beloved member of
the "NewsHour" family.
Al Vecchione was the first
executive producer
of "The MacNeil/Lehrer Report."
He died today at the age of 86.
Al began his broadcasting career
at NBC, covering
stories around the world.
In addition to helping to launch
our original
program in 1975, Al became the
executive in
charge of expanding from 30
minutes to creating
the nation's first hour-long
evening broadcast.
We are so grateful for his
decades of work
and friendship.
We will miss you, Al.
And that's the "NewsHour" for
tonight.
I'm Judy Woodruff.
Join us online and again right
here tomorrow
evening.
For all of us at the "PBS
NewsHour," thank
you, and we will see you soon.
For all of us at the "PBS
NewsHour," thank
you, and we will see you soon.